# Apertium++!, or Apertium 4.0, or making
Apertium DSLs internal/embedded

This is a project with an aim of:

* making a free/libre morphological transducer for every language of the
  world;

* making free/libre machine translators for translating between **all**
  related languages of a particular language group \(e.g. Turkic,
  Slavic, Indo-Iranian etc\);

* updating Apertium 3.0’s official documentation so that it reflects
  changes which have happened since the time of its publication,
  especially as the result of Google Summer of Code projects;

* reducing the code which developers have to maintain in a typical
  Apertium 3.0 monolingual or bilingual package.

> Hence two pluses in the name of the project...

The project, in its spirit and aims is similar to the [Apertium
project](https://www.apertium.org), and can be considered its spinoff,
with two additions:

* for each language, we will maintain a corpus of sharable texts,
  parallel or comparable to corpora for other languges

* machine translators will have a speech recognition & speech synthesis
  front-ends \(based on Mozilla’s [Common
  Voice](https://voice.mozilla.org) and
  [DeepSpeech](https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech) projects\).

> To be frank, if we come up with some useful technology, we hope to see
> it merged to the Apertium’s code base \(maybe in the form of different
> campaigns, such as "Help us to create a mophological transducer for
> every human language!"\).

Since one of the declared goals of ours is being able to handle speech
\(not just the written word\), and, since we want to re-evaluate some of
the design decisions made in the Apertium project \(and yet are not sure
at all whether such re-evaluations will turn out to be wise desicions\),
we decided to make a separate project out of this effort.

## 1. What could be improved in Apertium 3.0?

Apertium is a great project, with quite a few contributors, but here is
a list of things deemed as less-than-optimal in the current Apertium
setup:

* transfer rules are unidirectional, and currently there is no way of
  marking a transfer rule as ‘bidirectional’ and get a transfer rule for
  the opposite direction for free,

* there can be and usually there are several entries in a .lexc or .dix
  files with the same left-hand side \(and there is no compile-time
  checks against mistakenly adding the same word twice, possibly with a
  right and a wrong category

* rather long compile cycles, translators are not extensible
  programmatically

* not possible to re-use components in a programmatic way \(i.e. without
  having to copy-paste manually, which sooner or later will lead to
  out-of-date chunks\). Want we want instead is having a way to say,
  e.g. something like this:
  `from` `apertium-tat-rus` `import` `transfer-rule-x`,
  `from` `apertium-symbols` `import` `n,` `v,` `adj,` `np`,
  `parameterize(transfer-rule-x,` `lemma="foo")` etc.

* ?

We suppose that most of the problems listed will be due the fact that
the domain-specific languages used in Apertium \(and there a handful of
them – one seen in monolingual and bilingual `.dix` files, one seen in
`chunking`,  `interchunk` and `postchunk` transfer rules,  `lexc`,
`twol` and others are so-called external DSLs. They are parsed and
compiled. When writing in these DSLs, you don’t have access to a
full-fledged programming language which would allow you to extend the
DSL in question easily and simplify&automate things. You also don’t have
access to useful features of a full-fledged programming language like a
proper module system, which would allow you to re-use code accross
monolingual and bilingual packages reliably.

## 2. Desiderata

* Every Apertium 3.0. program is a valid     Apertium 4.0 program.

## 3. Installation

At the core of what we do is a Racket package called _apertiumpp_. Here
are insttructions on how to install it:

* Install the [Racket language](https://racket-lang.org).

* Clone this repository:
  `git` `clone` `https://github.com/taruen/apertium`.

* Go to the `apertiumpp` directory.

* Install the apertiumpp package: `rack` `pkg` `install` `apertiumpp`.

## 4. Tests/data for Apertium 3.0. packages

The `"apertium-tests"` directory contains tests for Apertium’s
monolingual and bilingual packages. These tests are written in the
[Racket](https://racket-lang.org) programming language using its dialect
called [Rash](https://docs.racket-lang.org/rash/index.html).

You can open the `".rkt"` files in `"apertium-tests"` in DrRacket \(and
IDE for the Racket language\), and run each clicking on the "Run" button
in DrRacket or pressing F5.

Tests do not compile the monolingual or bilingual packages
automatically, so you’ll need to do that beforehand.

In test files, you also might need to change the path to the monolingual
or bilingual packages you’re testing. Tests assume that both
`"apertium-all"` and `"apertium-tests"` are in the same directory.

## 5. Background reading

[http://www.greghendershott.com/fear-of-macros/](http://www.greghendershott.com/fear-of-macros/)
